Coming up next is the Science Fiction Radio Show, so stay with us.
This is the Science Fiction Radio Show, a commentary on science fiction and fantasy.
And here are your hosts.
This is Bill Vernon and Daryl Lane.
Michael Bishop has written a number of stunning science fiction works such as the Novel's
Eyes of Fire, the 1983 Nebula-winning No Enemy but Time, and the Urban Nucleus series A Little
Knowledge and Catacomb Years.
Bishop is also a master at writing short stories.
Some of his outstanding stories are on the Street of Serpents, Death and Designation
among the Asadi, and the White Otters of Childhood.
Fans and fellow writers alike have lauded Bishop.
He has been nominated for some 11 Hugo and Nebula awards.
Bishop's academic training is in English.
We asked him why he writes science fiction rather than mainstream.
Well, the truth is that I have wanted to be a writer since I was in about the eighth grade,
and I did not necessarily want to be a science fiction writer.
I wanted to be just a writer.
The reason that I am doing science fiction now, or have done primarily science fiction,
is that I was first successful in submitting stories that had a fantastic or a science
fictional element.
And in having them sell, the other stories, the mainstream stories that I wrote, received
primarily rejection slips early on.
And as I said before, I am kind of like the rat in the experimental cage who goes to the
lever and presses it.
And when the food comes out of one particular lever, that is the one he goes back to and
continues to press.
And that is the way I have done as far as science fiction goes to some extent.
It is not that I do not care for science fiction, and I am doing it solely because it was profitable,
or more profitable than the other type of writing, but simply that I ended up finding
very receptive editors in this particular field.
And that accounts for it more or less.
Science fiction is attractive to Bishop too, because it allows him the freedom to write
about a number of subjects and situations.
I think that science fiction does permit a writer to deal with just about anything that
he or she wishes to deal with.
You can handle contemporary events by projecting them into the future.
You can speculate about the past.
You can speculate about the distant, distant future.
You can speculate about origins and ultimate ends.
So that I think that really science fiction is a tremendously flexible genre, and that
is one of its main attractions to me.
And one of the reasons why I think I continue to write it even though I have aspirations
to do other things and have done other things.
A funeral for the Eyes of Fire, Bishop's first novel, came out in 1975.
Its revision, entitled Eyes of Fire, came out in 1980.
This novel relates the conflict between two cultures, an advanced spacefaring culture
and a primitive one.
As do many of Bishop's works, this novel carries a heavy, effectively used dose of anthropology.
We ask Bishop about the basis of this book.
It's a parable of some of the things that have happened in our past and that continue
to happen in our relationships to primitive peoples today.
And I probably should put primitive in quotes because that's a term that is frowned upon
in anthropological circles right now.
But at any rate, I do think that it was a kind of dramatic framing of situations that
have taken place in the confrontation between advanced civilizations and supposedly primitive,
in quotes, civilizations.
And it seems to me that in projecting it into a setting on a distant planet, that I was
just kind of presuming that this was the sort of thing that could happen over and over again.
But at the same time, really, it was a comment on the conflict between two different approaches
of viewing the world, one rather the technological approach and one the rather mystical or what
do you call it, the left brain side.
We'll have more with Michael Bishop on our next show.
This has been the Science Fiction Radio Show, a production of the Permian Basin Science Fiction
Association produced in conjunction with Odessa College in Odessa, Texas.
Thank you.
Coming up next is the Science Fiction Radio Show, so stay with us.
This is the Science Fiction Radio Show, a commentary on science fiction and fantasy.
And here are your hosts.
This is Daryl Lane.
And Bill Vernon.
Two closely related works by Michael Bishop are A Little Knowledge and Catacombs Years.
A Little Knowledge is a collection of loosely connected short stories and Catacombs Years
is a novel.
Both are about people who inhabit the urban nucleus of Atlanta, a future domed Atlanta
isolated from the rest of the world.
Here Bishop tells us why he used the concept of a domed city.
Each one of the cities was its own universe, its own world, the people were withdrawn and
isolated and they practiced the kind of isolationism.
In fact, in the story of the windows in Dante's Hell, the old woman, Amelia Longhope, who
is bound by two people who were going to her apartment really to discover what's happened
to her.
They find that she has created an entire world in her apartment, which resembles the bridge
of a starship as from an old television program.
And that she has been looking outward while her own society has been looking inward.
So that was one of the things that I was trying to do with the domed city.
I wasn't interested in the domed city as a technological marvel so much as I was in a,
I guess I was looking at each city as a kind of petri dish and I was trying to see what
the human beings, the bacteria, whatever you want to call them inside that petri dish
were going to do, how they were going to behave and why they were behaving in the ways that
they did.
So it was one way of focusing in on the human condition in an unusual way and in a metaphorical
way.
A recurring theme in Bishop's work seems to be an emphasis on eyes.
For instance, there's his first novel, A Funeral for the Eyes of Fire.
The Asadi in Transfigurations have prominent eyes which figure significantly in the plot.
The aliens in his first short story, Pinyonfall, have strange multi-lens eyes.
We ask Bishop about eyes and what they symbolize.
It has always seemed to me that the eyes are what's the old cliche, the windows of the soul.
And for an alien species, I think they would be similarly a means of looking into the heart
of the creature who has those eyes.
I think too, I was looking early on when I wrote the early story, Pinyonfall, which was
my first story.
I was looking for a way of making my aliens seem alien.
And one of the ways was to describe them physically and one of the most outstanding characteristics
of any creature, I think, are the eyes and how they differ from one species to another.
So the aliens in Pinyonfall had eyes like insects.
In A Funeral for the Eyes of Fire, I guess I was again looking for a means, an exotic
means of establishing the fact that my aliens were truly alien.
And by giving them different eyes, eyes like gems, that was one way of doing that.
There may have been some subliminal influence too from one of the novels of Ursula Le Guin
trying to think now, which was A City of Illusions.
I think one of her characters has very, very strange eyes.
But Ursula Le Guin has been an influence on me from way back and maybe that came into it to some extent too.
As far as the eyes of the Asadi go and the fact that they are a means of communication,
as well as a means of seeing, and also a means of feeding when you discover that they enabled
these creatures to photosynthesize part of their food, I think there I was looking at the eyes
in a functional sense as well as in a symbolic sense, as if they really were a physical component
of their makeup that could help them survive.
More with Michael Bishop on our next show.
This has been the Science Fiction Radio Show, a production of the Permian Basin Science Fiction Association
produced in conjunction with Odessa College in Odessa, Texas.
Coming up next is the Science Fiction Radio Show, so stay with us.
This is the Science Fiction Radio Show, a commentary on science fiction and fantasy.
And here are your hosts.
This is Bill Vernon.
And Daryl Lane.
One of Science Fiction writer Michael Bishop's most successful short stories is Death of Designation
Among the Asadi, which appeared in 1973.
In 1979, Bishop published the novel Transfigurations, which was a so-called fix-up of this short story.
That is, the story served as the initial third of the novel, then more material was added to continue it.
Here Bishop tells us how this came about.
I think when I wrote that story back in 72 or 73 that I felt that I was pretty much finished with it, that it was complete.
By the time I actually undertook to do Transfigurations, I had thought some more about the characters in that story,
both the humans and the aliens.
And I had also done a great deal of reading on human origins.
A lot of which I worked into the novel that followed that one, No Enemy but Time.
But at the same time, I guess I was really kind of laying the groundwork for No Enemy but Time
with the research that I did that carried me through Transfigurations.
The reason that I probably expanded Transfigurations or Death and Designation Among the Asadi
into a full-length novel that I called Transfigurations is that by that time I was a full-time writer.
I knew that this was one of my most popular stories, that there had been questions about it.
Some of the Luthians had not been tied up.
And I wanted to deal with the material again.
And I wanted to deal with it from the perspective of my new knowledge about human origins and primate anthology, that sort of thing.
So that was one of the reasons that I went ahead, used the original novella as part of the text
and created a good deal of more information about new characters and a sequel to the original novella in the course of the novel.
Transfigurations details an anthropological study of a group of primitive aliens.
Or as Bishop warns us, we must put the primitive in quotation marks.
Anthology forms the basis for Bishop's perhaps most important novel, No Enemy But Time.
This novel won the 1983 Nebula Award.
The protagonist, Joshua Campa, is capable of a sort of time travel through dreams.
In No Enemy But Time, he travels to a similar crumb of Pleistocene East Africa, an Africa inhabited by man's distant ancestors.
Campa lives among these hominids, ostensibly to study them, but he gets involved in their lives.
We commented to Bishop that writing this book must have required a lot of research.
I've told people that I probably did three and a half to four years of research for that book, and I believe that that's true.
And by that I don't mean that I was continuously researching and doing nothing else, not writing anything else, but only researching.
But I nevertheless did spend a great, great deal of time reading material to make my proto-humans, my hominids in that book,
as near to the real thing as I could imagine.
So I read people like Louis B. Leakey and Mary Leakey and Richard Leakey, the entire Leakey clan, Donald Johansson,
everything I could get my hands on in scientific journals and news magazines that related to new discoveries in East Africa, Tanzania, Kenya,
wherever they happened to be, Ethiopia, when Donald Johansson came along.
So yes, I spent an awful lot of time researching the physical nature of the stature, the possible lifestyles of these hominids,
but also the flora and fauna at the same period so that I could make a credible stab at what kinds of other animals they would encounter,
what kind of vegetation they would be living among, how they would have to go about their survival strategies, in other words.
So yes, that took me a lot of time. I found it very, very enjoyable while I was doing, and I really kind of put it out of my mind since then.
I imagine that I may come back to it later on, but I have kind of set it aside since then.
This has been the Science Fiction Radio Show, a production of the Permian Basin Science Fiction Association
produced in conjunction with Odessa College in Odessa, Texas.
Coming up next is the Science Fiction Radio Show, so stay with us.
This is the Science Fiction Radio Show, a commentary on science fiction and fantasy.
And here are your hosts.
This is David Carson.
And Daryl Lane.
You might have overheard some junior high or high school students talking about fighting trolls or battling an evil wizard and thought nothing of it.
But you might stop and stare if you heard a lawyer or doctor saying the same thing.
Well, it could happen and does most every weekend all across the U.S. and it's spreading around the world.
Right. What we're talking about is Dungeons & Dragons, a fantasy role-playing game produced by TSR Hobbies.
We talked with Dr. John Eric Holmes, author of fantasy role-playing games, who edited the original basic set of rules for Dungeons & Dragons.
Holmes teaches in the School of Medicine at USC. We asked him to give us a layman's description of the game.
Dungeons & Dragons are the other role-playing games, or a game where a group of people get together and one of them devises the kind of skeleton outline of a story in Dungeons & Dragons.
And the other people, each one of them takes the part of a single adventurer.
And in Dungeons & Dragons you can be an elf or a dwarf or a hobbit or a wizard or a hero.
And then they pretend to go into the story and try and solve the mystery or find the treasure or whatever.
And they all sit around the table and do this and they decide how things come out if they have to decide how an event occurs by just rolling dice and consulting a table in the book to see how the things occur.
So it's a story that's built up by a group of friends working together between them. That's what it is, really.
Dungeons & Dragons, known as D&D, is similar to chess in that there are several different types of pieces or characters on the board.
But the difference is that the players controlling the characters don't know what the whole board looks like. They only know the areas where they have been and where they are at the moment.
Right. Any new area has to be explored, just as if you were really there.
If you want to know what's behind a door, you tell a dungeon master that you want your character to open the door and look inside.
The dungeon master, or DM, is like a referee. He knows the plot of the scenario the players are involved in and tells them of the outcome of their actions.
The game can sound very involved with someone who has never played it, but most of the work is done by the dungeon master who is usually an experienced player.
The game's situation is similar to much of the fantasy literature that is popular today, but with a difference.
Holmes talks about the popularity of Dungeons & Dragons and its relationship to current fantasy literature.
Playing the game is different from reading a story. If you read a story, you can imagine yourself being the hero.
If the story is well written, you can really get into the hero's problems and you can see the wonders that he sees and the excitement that he experiences.
You can really enjoy that, but you have to do what the author says the hero does if you're imagining being that hero.
You can close the book and imagine how you might have handled things or what might happen if you had lived in those times.
There were a lot of people in the country at the time that Dungeons & Dragons were created who had daydreams about what they would do if they were hobbits, or if they were dwarfs, or if they were elves, or heroes.
In the game, you come a lot closer to being a hobbit, or a dwarf, or a hero, or a wizard.
Then you do just reading about it, or that you're imagining it all by yourself.
Because you have several other people playing with you, and let's say you decide that you want to be a wizard.
And all your friends agree that you are a wizard, or that your character in the game, but you start talking about that person as if it were yourself.
Is a wizard, and for four to six hours once a week in the evening, you feel like you really are that person.
And that's a lot more exciting than just reading about such a person.
This has been the Science Fiction Radio Show, a production of the Permian Basin Science Fiction Association, produced in conjunction with Odessa College in Odessa, Texas.
Coming up next is the Science Fiction Radio Show, so stay with us.
This is the Science Fiction Radio Show, a commentary on science fiction and fantasy.
And here are your hosts.
This is Darrell Lane.
And David Carson.
We're talking with Dr. John Eric Holmes, author of fantasy role-playing games about the leading fantasy game Dungeons & Dragons.
The game was created by Gary Gagax and Dave Arneson in the late 60s and early 70s.
Gagax now runs TSR Hobbies, the company that produces Dungeons & Dragons, as well as other role-playing games.
Several years ago, there was an incident that put Dungeons & Dragons in the public eye.
Supposedly, a student was killed playing a game of live Dungeons & Dragons in the steam tunnels under a university.
That story made national news, but when the entire story was uncovered, it wasn't near as interesting and was buried in the back sections, so to speak.
We asked Holmes to relate the entire incident.
Wasn't there a college student from Michigan who got killed playing live Dungeons & Dragons in the steam tunnels under Michigan State University?
No, there wasn't.
There was a college student at the University of Michigan State, I forgot now, who disappeared and his family couldn't find him.
He was a Dungeons & Dragons player.
And one of the things that the investigators, and they hired a private detective, family hired a private detective to try and locate him.
One of the things that he found was a series of maps, which were probably Dungeons & Dragons maps.
A lot of mysterious maps.
And somebody suggested that they were maps of the steam tunnels underneath the university and that people had been playing Dungeons & Dragons in the steam tunnels.
As far as I know, that's never really been proven to be the case that anybody was actually playing in the steam tunnels.
Anyway, he turned up alive.
He showed up, and I think he had gone to visit some member of his family some distance away.
And when there was enough publicity, there was a lot of publicity about this.
A lot of television and radio news coverage of it when it occurred.
Partly, I think, because the news media people sense that this was a weird cult, like the Jonestown massacre thing, which had occurred a year or so before.
And they thought they were onto something really bizarre.
But he turned up alive and his disappearance had to do with his own personal life and his own personal problems, I guess, and had nothing to do with his playing Dungeons & Dragons.
Another controversy that has brought some criticism of the game is the use of certain mythological creatures in the game.
The game's fantasy element includes demons and devils based either on popular books or classical myths.
The accusation usually is that the game is dangerous because it's actually teaching children.
Of course, the people who are playing the game are frequently adults and not children, but it depends on what age you consider to be a child, and there certainly are plenty of people 12 years old playing the game.
Teaching them evil, a cult, and a demonological ritual.
And the people who make these accusations, as it turns out, are extremely religious people, fundamentalist religious people, who really believe in the existence of the devil and his demons.
The flap over the use of the game, particularly its use as a club in a high school or something like that, usually ends up to be involved with this controversy about how serious do you take demonology?
And if you're serious about it, then you don't want to have it as a game or even as part of a game.
These elements can be left out of the game if the people playing find it offensive. There are hundreds of other mythical creatures to test the metal of any adventurer.
The game's creators never intended Dungeons and Dragons to offend anyone's religious beliefs. They only wanted to bring to life the elements of fantasy that so many people enjoy in books like Lord of the Rings.
This has been the Science Fiction Radio Show, a production of the Permian Basin Science Fiction Association, produced in conjunction with Odessa College in Odessa, Texas.